---
layout: post
title:  Jesus is the True Vine, Part 2
date:   2020-05-21
categories: sermons
author: David L. Mobley
---

[Recently, I began blogging on our Sunday sermons](https://heisfaithful.github.io/sermons/2020/04/02/sermon.html) to help myself review; today, I'm continuing that by covering our [May 17](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OK9MYxv8p-4) sermon, based on John 15:1-11. We're currently in a series on Jesus' "I am" statements in the book of John. These are key statements he uses to reveal his person, work, and relationship to God and they form a core part of the gospel of John.

As before, I won't summarize the sermon, but will focus on what I take away from it. Here, though, the key statements are John 15:1 and John 15:5:
>I am the true vine, and my Father is the gardener...
>
> I am the vine; you are the branches. If you remain in me and I in you, you will bear much fruit; apart from me you can do nothing.

This week's sermon is the second one on these statements. This time, the central question was "What does it mean to abide in Christ?" We went over three main answers:
1. To dwell or make your home in Christ. He's the place we keep coming back to, the first place we go -- the one we take refuge in.
2. To remain or continue in Christ. No matter what happens, we hold to him, stay with him, and do not drift away. We are diligent to stay anchored in Christ.
3. To depend or rely on Christ. When there's a problem it's natural for us to try and come up with human solutions, but our Christian battle is not against human problems which are amenable to human solutions. Abiding in Christ means *relying* on him, getting his help, and not turning first and foremost to human means.

It's that last point which was my main take-away. Pastor Peter said that we might think, "I don't have time to pray until I've done my part," but the reality is that we can't do our part until we learn to abide in Christ. And that was challenging. Lately, I've been struggling to develop a better habit of prayer -- more regular, more fervent, more continual. One of the things which intervenes, at times, is thinking that I have too much to do. But here he's absolutely right: To "do my part" without praying, without abiding in Christ, is to rely on human solutions rather than Christ and to put my trust in the wrong things. When I'm busy, that's the reason to pray *more*.

Luther supposedly (and famously) [said](https://twitter.com/desiringgod/status/828408365487423489?lang=en), "I have so much to do today that I shall spend the first three hours in prayer". I'm not necessarily saying that exactly, but I'm challenged by the sermon to make that same connection -- I *always* need to pray, but when facing a busy day I need to have that drive me to pray more, or I'm denying these truths about abiding in Christ.
