---
layout: post
title: Jesus is the Gate/Shepherd (Sermon)
date:   2020-05-01
categories: sermons
author: David L. Mobley
---

[Recently, I began blogging on our Sunday sermons](https://heisfaithful.github.io/sermons/2020/04/02/sermon.html) to help myself review; today, I'm continuing that by covering our [March 26 service](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pC0otSaktAQ), based on John 10 (in view of John 9). We're currently in a series on Jesus' "I am" statements in the book of John. These are key statements he uses to reveal his person, work, and relationship to God and they form a core part of the gospel of John.

As before, I won't summarize the sermon, but will focus on what I take away from it. Here, though, the two key statements are (John 10:7, 11):
> Truly, truly, I say to you, I am the door of the sheep

And
> I am the good shepherd; the good shepherd lays down His life for the sheep.

One key point by way of background is that we ought to understand this in the context of John 9, where a man born blind and then healed by Jesus has just been cast out of the synagogue -- and cut off from society, essentially -- by the Pharisees because he follows Jesus. So here, Jesus is explaining that he, not the synagogue or anything else in this life, is the way to eternal life, and to refuge and safety.

Another key verse is this, in 10:27:
> My sheep hear My voice, and I know them, and they follow Me...

So, my goal is to follow him, to come to him to have my needs met -- and to bring others to him as well. My goal is not to get people to belong to the groups I think are important, or to follow the right causes, but to follow Christ and help others do so as well.

I wrote this in my notes:
> This is a remarkable time, one of darkness and uncertainty. Whose voice are we listening to? Governor, president, doctors, lawyers? What are they saying, when will it be safe, when can we live? Where is stock market going? Will my job be OK?

We have many questions, but Jesus is the good shepherd who leads me to good pastures, abundant life. It's not just that he promises a good future -- but abundant life beginning even now. It's not just that by following him we avoid dying or avoid being punished, but it's real satisfaction and joy -- joy not dependent on our circumstances.

There are a lot of reasons we could be anxious at present, and a lot of things we might desire -- getting back out of lockdown, going to do this or that. But real satisfaction and joy can be found in following Jesus, wherever we are.

There's an old proverb, "Happiness is wanting what you have and not having what you want," which is relevant here too. So much discontent in our lives results from thinking that what we want will give abundant life.

In terms of personal application, I was challenged to pursue Jesus more and seek contentment there. While I recognize that increasing my income, or getting out of lockdown, won't make me happy, I do still look to other aspects of my circumstances. For example, whether my kids are getting along with one another, following instructions, etc. can have a big impact on my outlook. But really, that's just another circumstance which I don't control. I need to find my contentment in drawing near to Christ, not in getting people around me to behave the way I want.
