---
layout: post
title: "A few thoughts on the untimely death of Kobe Bryant"
date:   2020-01-26
categories: events
author: Paul Pak
---
*[Editor: This is a guest post by my friend Paul Pak, who posted this on Facebook and gave me permission to repost here. I liked his sentiments and perspective. - DLM]*

DISCLAIMER: This post is not a tribute to Kobe. It's my personal reflection on the reality of life/death, in light of today's news...

I think what made Kobe’s death so shocking, was that we all believed he was somehow invincible. He’s a man that had everything, and if anybody could survive a helicopter crash, it would be him.

It was a sobering reminder of the fragility of life, and that no amount of wealth, fame or legacy can guarantee yourself even one more breath of life. That's an absolutely scary thought if you don't know what happens to you after you die.

It’s a tragedy that the sports world lost an icon. It’s a tragedy that his family has to live without him and his daughter. However, the greatest tragedy from today is that they died, presumably, without knowing and being saved by the God that created them. That is what caused me to mourn today, and that is what makes this so difficult to swallow.

I had a long talk with my boys about today’s events. I explained to them that nobody knows when they’re going to die. Nobody woke up this morning, thinking today would be Kobe’s last day on earth. I also told them that they could be the best students or baseball players, but if they don’t know Jesus, then nothing they do in this life matters. We are not guaranteed another day of life, and we cannot take any of our wealth or accolades with us into eternity. Today was a very sad reminder of that.

When tragic events occur, it causes people to think more deeply about what happens after they die. As people mourn the loss of their favorite athlete and remember all of the great memories of his super human abilities, I hope we will all pause and reflect on the brevity of life and what happens after we die. We are here today and gone tomorrow, and while life is short, the afterlife is eternal. I am deeply saddened by today’s news, but as a Christian, I was also reminded that I don’t fear death. Not only do I not fear death, but because of my faith in Jesus, there is a longing and great anticipation for the eternal life that is to come.
