---
layout: post
title: "Remembering to persevere, part 2 (Sermon)"
date:   2020-09-24
categories: sermons
author: David L. Mobley
---

[Some time ago, I began blogging on our Sunday sermons](https://heisfaithful.github.io/sermons/2020/04/02/sermon.html) to help myself review; today, I'm continuing that by covering our [Sept. 20](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D1SVWDbd5po) sermon, on Hebrews 10:32-39. This was part two of a two-part series.

As usual, I won't summarize the sermon, since you can stream it if you want to hear yourself, but will focus on what I take away from it. We focused primarily on Heb. 10:35-39:
> Therefore, do not throw away your confidence, which has a great reward. 36 For you have need of endurance, so that when you have done the will of God, you may receive what was promised.
>> For yet in a very little while,
He who is coming will come, and will not delay.
But My righteous one shall live by faith;
And if he shrinks back, My soul has no pleasure in him.
> But we are not of those who shrink back to destruction, but of those who have faith to the preserving of the soul.

In the previous sermon on 10:32-39, we looked at the past -- the Hebrews were to remember the former days, when they first turned to Christ -- and then are encouraged to persevere in the present. Then, here, the Hebrews are to look ahead to the future, to the eternal reward they, and we, will have in Christ. Only that eternal reward is worth giving up present security, and turning away from preoccupation with our present circumstances.

Critically, they must not look forward to a change in their circumstances -- not a time when they are less persecuted, or more healthy, or whatever else. No, they're told to look forward to their final reward. This reminded me that some time ago, I realized I'd been giving my wife completely unbiblical advice. She'd sometimes feel overwhelmed with the chaos and turmoil of our life -- small kids, juggling responsibilities, ferrying kids here and there, trying to stop fights and ensure harmony, training the kids while homeschooling them, etc. And sometimes I would tell her, "This is just a season. Things will calm down, life will get better..." Eventually, though, reading Genesis I realized -- no, they may not get better. Part of the curse of the fall is that we'll labor in great toil until we die. We're not promised improved circumstances in this life. In fact, as Christians, we're told we'll suffer. I had to repent of the advice I'd given her, and realize that I instead should be pointing her to Christ, and to our eternal reward and rest. And, yes, God we can find joy and contentment in Christ *regardless of circumstances* along the way. But we're not promised improved circumstances.

Part of our temptation, we heard in this sermon, is to think that if we only had changed circumstances, or moved on to the next life stage, it would be easier to follow Christ, easier to be faithful to him and remain with him. We usually all agree that our current circumstances aren't what we would like. Indeed, in every life stage we'll find it hard to remain anchored in Christ, up until we die. So, we need endurance. That's a major theme here.

So, we must give up pursuing joy in vacation, or having a nicer house, or a better job, or visiting the nicest places in the world. True joy, real lasting joy, is only to be found in knowing Christ.

My key take-aways from this sermon were:
- A reminder not to look to changed or improved circumstances in this world to help my spiritual walk. The only solution is to cling to Christ, no matter the circumstance, and to seek my satisfaction there.
- Encouragement to endure and persevere. This life is temporary, passing away. Sometimes I catch myself thinking about how to make my life more "sustainable" -- I might ask myself whether I'm getting enough sleep, or whether I feel stressed, etc. But I'm not here to live have a nice, comfortable life where I'm always well rested. I'm here to find rest and peace in Christ and finish the race with perseverance. It's OK to long for the finish, to long for the day when I get to be with Christ and have my eternal reward. What I'm after is "a better possession and a lasting one..." and receiving what is promised, not a comfortable and peaceful life here.
- Encouragement to endure and persevere *in Christ*. I have access to him, access to God. He's the one who can give me joy *regardless of circumstance*, the one who give strength to continue the race and endure. I must not forget how much I need him for that; I must cling to him. 
