---
layout: post
title: "Not Erasing Hell (Sermon)"
date:   2020-09-12
categories: sermons
author: David L. Mobley
---

[Some time ago, I began blogging on our Sunday sermons](https://heisfaithful.github.io/sermons/2020/04/02/sermon.html) to help myself review; today, I'm continuing that by covering our [Sept. 6](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nSlV-mKp-SQ) sermon, on Hebrews 10:26-31.

As usual, I won't summarize the sermon, since you can stream it if you want to hear yourself, but will focus on what I take away from it. We focused in large part on this (Heb. 10:26-29)
> For if we go on sinning willfully after receiving the knowledge of the truth, there no longer remains a sacrifice for sins,  but a terrifying expectation of judgment and the fury of a fire which will consume the adversaries.  Anyone who has set aside the Law of Moses dies without mercy on the testimony of two or three witnesses.  How much severer punishment do you think he will deserve who has trampled under foot the Son of God, and has regarded as unclean the blood of the covenant by which he was sanctified, and has insulted the Spirit of grace?

This was written, we heard, to those in the Corinthian church, especially to those who were participating in the church and in some way benefitting, but not really saved -- those who were drifting. It's to those who claimed to be Christians but really are unbelievers. Why is he saying this? It's a warning to the church to wake up, to not drift, and to repent. Those reading this who are not saved need to recognize it, and turn to him in repentance.

Key applications of this are, first, not to use our own moral compass to decide what's right and wrong but to come to the Word and let that show us. Second, we ought to examine ourselves first -- not point this warning at others. Partly, we all need to make sure we are right with Christ. But then, are we concerned about those around us who might be going to hell? Are we joining with society around us in being so concerned with job loss, poverty, social justice, etc. -- ready to put in any kind of effort to rescue people from earthly "terrors", but doing nothing to rescue people from hell? Third and finally, this reminds us not to judge from a distance. One person might be truly struggling against sin, and another just assuming their salvation and giving in to sin, and we can't tell the difference until we come close to them.

The big area in which I was challenged by this sermon was to remember, and live in view of, the importance of the gospel for those around me. In my work, I spend some effort trying to fix systematic problems and ensure students are treated fairly, etc. And that's important -- but even more important is where people are headed for eternity. PPeter asked whether we grieve because of hell, get on our knees about hell, or march about it. And that's challenging. I need to remember, and organize my life around this principle: God has me here to help rescue people from hell.
