---
layout: post
title:  I am the Way and the Truth and the Life(Sermon)
date:   2020-05-09
categories: sermons
author: David L. Mobley
---

[Recently, I began blogging on our Sunday sermons](https://heisfaithful.github.io/sermons/2020/04/02/sermon.html) to help myself review; today, I'm continuing that by covering our [May 3](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=quKCdfhjkA0), based on John 13:36-14:6. We're currently in a series on Jesus' "I am" statements in the book of John. These are key statements he uses to reveal his person, work, and relationship to God and they form a core part of the gospel of John.

As before, I won't summarize the sermon, but will focus on what I take away from it. Here, though, the key statement is (John 14:6):
> I am the way and the truth and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me.

The sermon touched on all three aspects of this -- that Jesus is the way, the truth, and the life. Each of these provides comfort, and equips us; each in a different way. For example, the fact that he is the way provides comfort to us if we know him -- because it means we know the way to salvation and to the Father.

We heard how part of what Peter -- who was part of this exchange -- had to learn was that Jesus himself was the way. It wasn't going to be Peter and his determination, effort, ability, or even his love that would get him there, but only Jesus.

I think my biggest take-away was exactly that point: There's no room in this "I am" statement for any kind of self reliance. Yes, God calls me to exert effort. Yes, God calls me to exercise my abilities and gifts. Yes, God calls me to love him and to love others. But Jesus himself is the way, and that's how I draw near to God, that's how I get to heaven and find life to the full. Everything **I** do for God must flow out of gratitude because of what I have in Christ. I know these truths, but it's great to be reminded -- because it's so common for me to let too great a focus on self creep back in. So I'm thankful that Jesus is the way, and nothing rests on my own efforts or abilities. 
