---
layout: post
title: Easter Sunday 2020
date:   2020-04-17
categories: sermons
author: David L. Mobley
---

[Recently, I began blogging on our Sunday sermons](https://heisfaithful.github.io/sermons/2020/04/02/sermon.html) to help myself review; today, I'm continuing that by covering our [Easter Sunday service](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YZNedlsVOu4), based on John 11.

If you'd like details of the sermon, please stream it via the link above. Here I'll focus on what I take away from it. Our text was from John 11, on how Jesus raised Lazarus from the dead, and connects with a recent theme in our church -- the "I am" statements of Jesus in the book of John. Here, the relevant statement is:
> I am the resurrection and the life; he who believes in Me will live even if he dies

(John 10:25, NASB)

John 11 plays out in several scenes. The first, in v1-6, shows how Jesus remained where he was when he received word of Lazarus' illness, ultimately allowing Lazarus to die -- and his family to experience this death -- so the solution would shine much more. The second scene plays out in v7-16, where the disciples fail to understand that he is headed to Jerusalem, to his death. They don't understand, and won't understand, until after his death and resurrection. On the side, they have been discussing which of them was the greatest -- but he's trying to prepare them for his death and burial. They had a front row seat to what Christ was doing, but (at this point) missed the point entirely. So, what about us, do we ourselves truly recognize what the resurrection means for us, or are we caught up with our own glory and advancement? Scene 3 plays out in v17-27 where Lazarus has been dead and buried for three days, and his family has been grieving. Jesus comes to illustrate his power, showing he is the way, the truth, and the life/the resurrection and the life. "He who believes in me will live even though he dies." He illustrates his power. Because Jesus is the life, the resurrection, we can have joy that is independent of our circumstances. But in this scene, the grief is necessary to prepare the way for what is to come. The fourth scene plays out in v32-37 where Jesus meets Mary, who recognizes that Lazarus would not have died if Jesus had been there, and Jesus weeps -- likely because of the coming judgment. He has compassion on them (and us) and that compassion leads to his weeping. He wept for us, and that's why Easter is such good news. Christ saw our every sin, yet drew near to take our sorrows on himself. Then the final scene is the raising of Lazarus. The sisters are concerned because he must not only be dead but stink by now, but instead, Jesus raises him from the dead -- simply by saying, "Lazarus, come out." This is a precursor for the real story, the resurrection of Christ, and shows the real hope coming through him. But even in this event, reactions are mixed -- some believe, but some go to the Pharisees to oppose Jesus, further paving the way for Jesus' own death and resurrection. Jesus' death and resurrection is the event that changes everything -- not bringing us to live a better life but to live a NEW life.

I took away or was challenged by a couple of key things:
- In scene 2, this connected back to the earlier sermon on Jesus as the bread of life. Some came to him to get bread; some came to him to get HIM. Similarly, here, how do I see him? Is he my goal? Or is he a means? The disciples at some point saw Jesus as a means to glory, arguing about who would receive the place of greatest honor. And sometimes, I might try and use him in the same way. But that's missing the whole point. HE is the greatest treasure; there is no greater reward. All earthly honors and rewards fade before the reward of having him, and having new life in him. What a treasure.
- In Christ, there is joy independent of circumstances; that's a great reminder in the present when circumstances are in turmoil. And it's not just that I have new life to look forward to in the future, but in Christ I have new life NOW.
- During Passion week, and listening to the sermon, I was reminded of the personhood -- even humanity -- of Christ. He's a real person who lives today, one even *present* with me today, one *accessible* to me. And not only does he call me into relationship with himself and express his delight at that, but he promises himself to me. It would be enough to be able to say that I am his, but he calls us friends (e.g. John 15:14-15) and siblings, and says he will abide in us (John 15:4 etc.). Yes, I know these truths, these doctrines, but I think God is helping me see more clearly and really believe that Jesus himself, as a real person, is constantly accessible to me now and every day as friend and Lord. He's not just the suffering savior who lived, died, and was raised and now the story is done (except that one day he will come again); no, he's also the savior who lives NOW and wants me to draw near. May that shape my life and thoughts this day and every day!
