---
layout: post
title: "Remembering to persevere" (Sermon)
date:   2020-09-13
categories: sermons
author: David L. Mobley
---

[Some time ago, I began blogging on our Sunday sermons](https://heisfaithful.github.io/sermons/2020/04/02/sermon.html) to help myself review; today, I'm continuing that by covering our [Sept. 13](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yKZfQ2V0KnU) sermon, on Hebrews 10:32-39. This was part 1 of a two-part sermon.

As usual, I won't summarize the sermon, since you can stream it if you want to hear yourself, but will focus on what I take away from it. We focused in large part on this (Heb. 10:32-24)
> But remember the former days, when, after being enlightened, you endured a great conflict of sufferings, partly by being made a public spectacle through reproaches and tribulations, and partly by becoming sharers with those who were so treated. For you showed sympathy to the prisoners and accepted joyfully the seizure of your property, knowing that you have for yourselves a better possession and a lasting one.

The Hebrews, here, are called to remember the zeal they had at first -- how they were able to rejoice in Christ even in the midst of suffering. At one time, it was a joy for them even to suffer for Christ, to be a spectacle, to have their property seized, etc. But, they had drifted -- other priorities crept in, and they'd forgotten, lost sight of the joy which was theirs in Christ. So they are being called to remember -- to remember this joy, and to repent and turn back to Christ, to stop drifting and to return.

This sermon was a terrific reminder to me. Life is busy, and often distracting. But I already have *everything* in Christ, and he himself is the one I need. He's the source of real joy, the one I need every day, the living water and the bread of life. That's what I need to remember, and return to him -- every day, continually, because Christ himself is so much greater than anything the world has to offer. And he's *my* savior. May that overcome my every distraction and surpass every other interest! 
