---
layout: post
title: "Melchizedek"
date:   2020-05-21
categories: sermons
author: David L. Mobley
---

[Some time ago, I began blogging on our Sunday sermons](https://heisfaithful.github.io/sermons/2020/04/02/sermon.html) to help myself review; today, I'm continuing that by covering our [May 24](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qqAP_h0wkEo) sermon, based on Hebrews 7:1-10. This marks a return to our pre-COVID19 series on Hebrews.

As before, I won't summarize the sermon, since you can stream it if you want to hear yourself, but will focus on what I take away from it.

The absolute greatness of Christ was really the main theme of the sermon. We were reminded how Christ is of the order of Melchizedek (see also Psalm 110) and this shows his superiority to Abraham in several ways. First, the one who collects tithes is greater than the one who gives. Second, the one who blesses is greater than the one blessed, and third, the one who serves permanently is greater than the one who serves temporarily. In all of these ways Melchizedek was greater than Abraham -- but Jesus Christ is the ultimate.

What does that mean for me now? I need Jesus in every way, and his greatness and superiority is a reminder of that. I need Christ himself more than I need to check off a lot of items on my to-do list or avoid offending the people around me or anything else. But I need to be reminded of this, because I'm so prone to pay so much attention to all these other things. But if I see clearly who he is, and what he's doing for me now as my high priest, everything else comes back into the proper perspective.

May God help me to truly, daily see and meditate on the superiority of Christ, and continually see him as my greatest treasure.
