---
layout: post
title: "Jesus, the power and wisdom of God (sermon)"
date:   2020-12-25
categories: sermons
author: David L. Mobley
---

[Some time ago, I began blogging on our Sunday sermons](https://heisfaithful.github.io/sermons/2020/04/02/sermon.html) to help myself review; today, I'm continuing that by covering our Dec. 20 sermon, on 1 Cor. 1:22-25, by Pastor Peter Kim. You can stream the [recording of this service here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NxnCHnv3LHE).

Our text was this:
> For indeed Jews ask for signs and Greeks search for wisdom; but we preach Christ crucified, to Jews a stumbling block and to Gentiles foolishness, but to those who are the called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God. Because the foolishness of God is wiser than men, and the weakness of God is stronger than men.

This sermon began by addressing the Lord, liar, lunatic argument -- that Jesus was and is the son of God, or a madman or something worse. Either millions are wasting their lives because of him, or saved because of him.

We looked at three aspects here -- that the Jews sought signs, the Greeks seek wisdom, and Jesus and the gospel are a stumbling block to the world. I'll let you watch the sermon yourself to get full details on those.

We looked at how, no matter how we change the system in our country, sin and problems will persist. Until we are restored back to the glory of Christ, we will be caught seeking temporary glory elsewhere and that drives all manner of sin. Sin originates from our hearts, and there is no true fix aside from a changed heart.

Jesus came to give life and to give it abundantly, but until we see that clearly, we'll be trapped seeking whatever catches our attention.

We get joy out of watching amazing sports achievements or great accomplishments, but imagine how much joy is to be found in the greatest power, truth, love, and glory we can possibly imagine -- or even greater. That's the invitation of Christmas -- this incredibly glorious person came to walk on earth and become a sympathetic high priest, one who helps the weary and heavy laden and gives us rest.

My main take-aways from this were on a couple fronts. First, even within my own family, there's a temptation to think that I can find solutions to problems, or help with problems, from improving our system at home. This provided an important reminder that even the best system can't solve all problems; the real solution is only Christ. Yes, a good system can be helpful in maintaining order -- but only Christ changes the heart. Second, this Christmas season I want to bring all my problems, sin, and burdens to Christ, seeing his glory and finding the peace only he can bring. May I fix my eyes on him today!
