---
layout: post
title: "Take-aways from Postman's book"
date:   2021-08-08
categories: books
author: David L. Mobley
---

In [my last post](https://heisfaithful.github.io/books/2021/08/06/postman.html) I looked at Neil Postman's excellent book, ["Amusing Ourselves to Death: Public discourse in the age of show business"](https://amzn.to/2WVyH0S). While the book is not written from a Christian perspective, I think Christians can benefit from taking a careful look at some of his ideas and assessing how our culture and media might be influencing us. If necessary, we might also consider what corrective measures we could take.

As I mentioned, Postman's work is, in a way, scary; if indeed our media habits change our desires and even how we think, what can we do about it? We're immersed in our culture; is there any hope we can change or even take a step back?

## We ought to dig deep

Postman observed that our media (and, by extension, our culture) tends to be particularly concerned with the immediate, the shallow, and the entertaining. TV, video, and social media don't lend themselves to deep, careful analysis. But the Bible tells us we're to love God with all our heart, soul, *mind* and strength (Luke 10:27), so we ought to be asking how we can ensure our minds are fully engaged and we're exercising our strength -- not stopping at being entertained. Proverbs pictures wisdom as something to be earnestly sought and greatly treasured (e.g. Prov. 8) and the Psalms point out the delights and benefits of deeply meditating on and studying God's word (e.g. Psalm 119). This type of striving sounds like it is the opposite of shallow.

Around the same time I read Postman's book, I also read ["Deep Work"](https://amzn.to/3AobDpY) by Cal Newport. Newport's book has a dramatically different focus (mainly on work productivity), but Newport observed something which I think connects with Postman's book. Newport noticed that members of a Jewish community who engaged in regular, deep, extended and focused study of Scripture saw that their focused study began to affect their ability to focus in other areas of their lives. Essentially, they were beginning to re-learn how to dig deeply into a topic, stay focused, and think carefully.

I think this gives still greater hope for Christians. Not only do we have a holy God who speaks to us through his Word and works in us by his Holy Spirit to help us understand and benefit from that Word, but the very process of deeply studying the Word can help us escape from or avoid bad habits we would otherwise pick up from our media and the culture around us. In other words, engaging in focused study of the Word provides a kind of antidote to the shallowness which so often surrounds us in our media.

This is not to say that we ought, then, to indulge in our favorite media without any restraint because the Word will rescue us -- but rather that we ought to be spurred on to study God's truth far more, and know that God can use his Word to instruct and help us. Rather than being scary, Postman's ideas can serve to remind us of the importance of digging deeply into the Scriptures.

## Engage with good books

Postman's book also provided a powerful reminder to me that TV and videos are no substitute for good books (beyond Scripture), and reminded me of how important it is to get my kids (and myself) to the library. Reading helps us learn to think, to engage with big ideas, and to see through the eyes of others -- even those from other times. In a previous post, [I noted how C.S. Lewis highlighted the merits of reading *old* books](https://heisfaithful.github.io/culture/2020/12/02/Machen.html), as they help us correct the characteristic mistakes of our own period. In any case, Postman's book was a great reminder to me to engage deeply with books, and the big and important ideas we find there.

## Take time to think deeply and meditate

Along with engaging with books, Postman's work reminded me how important it is that I take time to really carefully think, consider, and meditate. Yes, I should meditate on God's Word, and the Bible itself speaks a great deal about that. But I ought also to take time to consider all manner of other issues. How will I really understand myself, the people around me, the Word, and the world, if I don't take time in deep contemplation? If I'm not careful, the tyranny of the urgent and the constant availability of one some kind of media -- even "good" media -- will prevent me from ever having the time to think deeply. And without it, how will I ever really gain understanding?

## Don't always be entertained

Postman's work also highlighted how TV and video (as well as, now, social media) encourage in us a habit of trying to be constantly entertained. Matters have gone even further since Postman's time, given that we always have a device at hand ready to entertain us when we have the slightest amount of down time or a tiny gap in our schedule. If I'm waiting in line for something, no problem -- I can pull out my phone and scroll my social media feed, check the news or answer a couple of messages. I never have to worry about being bored or without something to do.

But, Postman's book reminded me that the simple act of pulling my phone out of my pocket can sometimes work against what God wants for me. Perhaps in that idle time in line, I'd begin being troubled by an issue at home or at work that I really need to deal with -- one which I would ignore, sweep under the rug, or save for another day if I'm being entertained. Or perhaps that time will be when I turn over today's Bible reading in my mind and gain some new insights, or see how they connect with current events. Or maybe I'll even talk with the person in front of me in line. If I'm constantly being entertained, I'll likely have space in my mind for little else. So, perhaps sometimes I need to get bored standing in line, or drive silently in the car, even though I have a vast amount of entertainment ready at hand. That "boredom" may be something I need to help me grow.

## Focus on what God is calling me to do

Extending Postman's analysis to the age of the smartphone, it's easy to see how I can *almost* become a victim of notifications, constantly responding to whatever notifications are most urgent or seem highest priority on my phone or computer. In doing so, I'm surrendering to someone else's priorities. Postman's book, then, also provides a reminder to dedicate myself to what God calls me to do -- not what my notifications are calling me to do. Focusing on what God calls me to may mean I don't get to answering messages as promptly as I would like. I have to remember that my devices can be a valuable tool to help me serve God, but only if I don't let myself be mastered by them.

Overall, then, Postman's book was a helpful reminder of the importance of digging deeply -- into God's Word, into good books, and into life itself, while not letting myself become enslaved by the tyranny of the urgent. Postman's book itself doesn't offer much hope, I think; ultimately, he faced the problem that it's hard for culture to save itself from culture. However, I believe there is great hope in the power of God and in his Word, since it speaks to us from outside our culture. 
