---
layout: post
title: "Suddenly (sermon)"
date:   2021-01-04
categories: sermons
author: David L. Mobley
---

[Some time ago, I began blogging on our Sunday sermons](https://heisfaithful.github.io/sermons/2020/04/02/sermon.html) to help myself review; today, I'm continuing that by covering our Dec. 27 sermon, on Matthew 25:1-13, by Pastor Nate Kwak. You can stream the [recording of this service here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7C5gSwXxFZs).

This sermon dealt with the famous parable of the ten virgins. Pastor Nate reminded us how some of the turmoil of 2020 has helped remind us that we are not in control of our own destinies, A tiny virus, invisible to the naked eye, flipped everything upside down. For a while, it brought some soberness and a perspective change which, for some, was a great thing and a reminder of the sovereign God who reigns over the world. For some, it brought a restored prayer life and a reminder of what's most important. But, has that soberness stayed with us?

This sermon focused on that -- soberness in view of the coming of the king and his kingdom. The Israelites lived throughout the Old Testament waiting for the coming king, the coming savior, yet they did not recognize him when he came because he didn't match what they expected and desired. What about us? Where are our ambitions and desires? Perhaps we don't seek a mansion and a Lamborghini, but maybe we are focused on having a particular kind of life. Isaiah 53 speaks of the savior and says, "we did not esteem Him". Is that us? Do we recognize and love the Messiah as he actually is, or as we want him to be? Do we call on him to fulfill our desires or vise versa?

Israel was called to wait on that coming king, but so are we. The parable of the ten virgins deals with this. All of them knew the king was going to be coming, and they were all to get up and meet him, yet only some had enough oil ready. Only some were ready for him to actually come. Many of us think of how we will get ready, how we will prepare, tomorrow or later. Pastor Nate quoted JC Ryle, who said something along the lines of this: "Tomorrow is the devil's day, but today is God's. Satan does not care how spiritual your intentions are, or how holy your resolutions, if only they are determined to be done tomorrow..." because tomorrow may never come.

This was challenging and encouraging, a great reminder to live each and every day for Christ, rejoicing in what he's already done and looking forward to his coming -- not focusing on having the ideal life here.  
